---
title: "Functional Programming eXchange 2011-First announcement and call for speakers"
date: 2010-10-13T01:12:48.3530000
draft: false
---

<p>Last week Skills Matter quietly announced that they will be hosting a new edition of the Functional Programming eXchange on 18th March 2011 at there head quarters in Holburn, London:    <br /><a href="http://skillsmatter.com/event/open-source-dot-net/functionalpx-2011">http://skillsmatter.com/event/open-source-dot-net/functionalpx-2011</a></p>  <p>This new edition will have a similar theme to last years a event. It will be in depth talks on functional programming, some on the general theory of functional programming, some language specific talks (from a range of languages such as F#, Scala, Clojure, Haskell, OCaml) as well as case studies from people already using FP in industry. The talks will aimed at FP enthusiasts who are already using FP in a professional setting or thinking about doing so soon.</p>  <p>After the success of 2009 events event I’m really looking forward to this new edition. I’ve already start working on the program and although we’re not quite ready to announce it yet, I’m happy to say I’m already in contract with some world class experts who are interested in talking at the event. However, I still have some room for some more talks so if you like to speak at the event please get in contact with me: <a href="mailto:robert@strangelights.com">robert@strangelights.com</a>.</p>  <p><strong>UPDATE: </strong>Someone asked what the time scale for submissions was: we’re hoping to start announcing speakers at the end of the month, so we would ideally like to have most of the speakers in place by then. This doesn’t mean there’s no chance of being accept after this, we may still be interested in speakers if we have slots free, but the chances will degrade as function of time. This does not necessarily mean you need to write a full abstract feel to ping with your ideas first of all and I’ll tell you if I’m interested.  </p>
